---
title: "Random math: 16"
tag: [RM, Linear Algebra]
---
Source of most content: [Gunhee Cho](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCB_AbuIVIG8I3K3_T_j0FSw/)

# Inner product space

`Def.`{:.info}
Given a finite dimenstional vector space $V$ over $F$, we call a function $< , >: V \times V \rightarrow F$ the **inner product** if it satisfies:
{:.info}
> 1. $\forall x,y,z \in V, < x+y, z> = < x+z> + < x, z>.$
> 2. $\forall c \in F, \forall x,y \in V, \ < cx, y > = c< x, y>.$
> 3. $\forall x,y \in V, < x, y > = \overline{ < y, x >}.$
> 4. $< x, x> > 0$ if $ x\ne 0$, $x=0 \leadsto < x, x > = 0$.

Inner product introduces the concept of length, distance and angle. <br>

NB1; Let $F=\mathbb{R}$, then $<, >$ is symmetric and bilinear, i.e., it is linear w.r.t. 1st component and 2nd component. <br>
NB2; Let $F=\mathbb{C}$, then $<, >$ is not symmetric and not bilinear since $< x, cy > = \overline{c} < x, y>$ but **Hermitian** (conjugate linear).

`Def.`{:.info}
Given an **inner product space** $(V, <,> )$, define **norm of $x$**, $\Vert x \Vert := \sqrt{< x, x >}$, **distance of $x$ and $y$**, $d(x,y) := \Vert x - y \Vert$.
{:.info}

`Def.`{:.info}
Let $A = (a_{ij}) \in Mat_{m\times n}(F)$. Define $ A^* = (c_{ij}), $ where $c_{ij}= \overline{a _{ji}}$, i.e., $ A* = \overline{ (A^\top )} = (\bar{A})^\top $ which is called **adjugate transpose of $A$ (adjoint of $A$)**.
{:.info}

`Def.`{:.info}
Given a finite dimensional inner product space $(V, < , >)$, let $S \leqslant V$. Define  **orthogonal complement of $S$**, $S^\perp := \\{v\in V \mid < v, s > =0, \forall s \in S \Leftrightarrow v \perp S \\}$.
{:.info}

e.g.) $\\{0\\}^\perp = V$ and $V^\perp = \\{ 0\\}$.

## Proposition

$$ \text{Let } S= \{ v_1, \cdots, v_k \mid v_i \ne 0\} \text{ be orthogonal subset of } V \text{, i.e., } \forall i \ne j, < v_i, v_j > = 0. \nonumber$$

$$\text{ Then, } S \text{ is linearly independent and } \forall y \in span(S), y = \sum_{i=1}^k a_i v_i, \text{ where } a_i = \frac{< y, v_i >}{< v_i, v_i>} \nonumber$$


NB3; With inner product, we can find the value of coefficient.

### Proof

1. Let $y=a_1 v_1 + \cdots + a_k v_k =0,\ a_i \in F$. Then, by definition, $a_i =  \frac{< 0, v_i >}{< v_i, v_i>} = 0$. Thus, $S$ is linearly independent.
2. $< y, v_i > = < \sum_{j=1}^k a_j v_j , v_i > \stackrel{linearity}{=} \sum_{j=1}^k < a_j v_j , v_i > \stackrel{orthogonal}{=} < a_i v_i , v_i > = a_i <  v_i , v_i >.$


---

$$ \text{Given a finite dimensional inner product space } (V, < , >). \text{ Let } W \leqslant V. \text{ Then, } W^\perp \leqslant V \text{ and } V = W \oplus W^\perp. \nonumber$$

<br>
NB4; For $v \in V\setminus \\{0\\}$, we can write $v= w+ w^\perp, w\in W$. From above proposition and [this](/rm/rm15#proof-3), we can see that this expression is unique. Then, $w$ is the unique vector in $W$ that is *closest* to $v$, i.e., $ \Vert v -w \Vert \leq \Vert v- x \Vert, \forall x \in W$.  

### Proof

1. Since $0 \in W^\perp$, $W^\perp \ne \emptyset$. Take any $v_1, v_2 \in W^\perp,$ then $< v_1 - v_2, w> = < v_1, w> - < v_2, w > = 0-0 =0$, i.e., $v_1 - v_2 \in W^\perp$. Therefore, $W^\perp \leqslant V$.
2. To prove $V= W \oplus W^\perp$, we need to show (a) $V=W+W^\perp$ and (b) $W \cap W^\perp = \\{ 0 \\}$.
* (a) Let $\beta = \\{ v_1, \cdots, v_k \\}$ be an orthonormal basis of $W$ with $dim W = k$, i.e., $\Vert v_i \Vert =1, \forall i$. Take any $v \in V$ and define $u:= \sum_{i=1}^k < v, v_i > v_i \in W$. Then, $\forall i, < v - u, v_i > = < v -\sum_{j=1}^k < v, v_j > v_j , v_i >$ $= < v, v_i >- \sum_{j=1}^k < v, v_j > < v_j , v_i > \stackrel{\text{orthonormal}}{=} < v, v_i> - < v, v_i> < v_i, v_i> = 0$. Thus $v-u \perp W$, i.e., $v-u \in W^\perp$, which implies that $V= W+ W^\perp$.
* (b) Take any $x \in W \cap W^\perp$. Then, $ < x, x> = 0$ which implies that $ x= 0$, i.e., $W \cap W^\perp = \\{ 0\\}$.

---

$$ \text{ Consider } V^* = \{ f: V \rightarrow F \mid f \text{ is linear} \}. \text{ Take any } g \in V^*. \text{ Then, } \exists! y\in V \text{ s.t. } g=g_y, \text{ where } g_y: x \mapsto < x, y > \nonumber$$

<br>
NB5; $g_y(x) = < x, y >$ is linear since $< , >$ is linear w.r.t. 1st component. <br>
NB6; $\Phi: V^* \rightarrow V \ (<,y> \mapsto y)$ is a VS isomorphism.

### Proof

Choose an orthonormal basis $\beta = \\{ v_1, \cdots, v_n \\}$ of $V$.
1. (Uniqueness) Suppose $y_1, y_2$ exist. Then, $g_{y_1} = g_{y_2}= g$, i.e., $\forall x \in V, \ < x , y_1 > = < x, y_2 >$ $ \leadsto \forall x \in V, \ < x , y_1 - y_2 > =0$. Take $x = y_1 - y_2$, then $ \Vert  y_1 - y_2 \Vert =0 \Leftrightarrow y_1 = y_2$.
2. (Existence) If $y$ exists, then it can be represented by basis $y=\sum_{i=1}^n < y, v_i >v_i.$ Thus, let $y = \sum_{i=1}^n \overline{g(v_i)}v_i$. Then, $\forall i, \ g_y(v_i) = < v_i, y > = < v_i, \sum_{j=1}^n \bar{g(v_j)}v_j> = \sum_{j=1}^n g(v_j) < v_i, v_j> = g(v_i)$. Therefore, $g_y(x) = g(x), \forall x \in V $.