---
title: "Random math: 24"
tag: [RM, Topology]
---
Source of most content: [Gunhee Cho](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCB_AbuIVIG8I3K3_T_j0FSw/) and [Lecture note by Matsumura](http://pi.math.cornell.edu/%7Ematsumura/math4530/math4530web.html)

# Hausdorff Space

`Def.`{:.info} 
Given T.S. $(X, T_X)$, $\\{ a_n\\}_{n=1}^\infty \subseteq X$ and $a \in X$. We say $\\{ a_n \\}$ converges to $a$, $a_n \stackrel{n \rightarrow \infty}{\rightarrow} a$ if $\forall$ nbhd $V$ of $a$, $\exists N \in \mathbb{N}$ s.t. $\forall n \geq N$, $a_n \in V$.
{:.info}

NB1; Give a toplogy $T = \\{ \\{ b \\}, \\{ a,b \\}, \\{ b,c \\}, X, \emptyset   \\}$ on $X$. Define seq. $\\{ x_n \\}$ s.t. $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}, x_n = b$.
Then, $x_n \stackrel{n \rightarrow \infty}{\rightarrow} b$ and $x_n \stackrel{n \rightarrow \infty}{\rightarrow} a$ and $x_n \stackrel{n \rightarrow \infty}{\rightarrow} c$.

> 1. $x_n \stackrel{n \rightarrow \infty}{\rightarrow} b$ : nbhd of $b$ can be $\\{ b \\}, \\{ a,b \\}, \\{ b,c \\}$, or $X$. $\forall n \geq 1$, $b$ belongs to all nbhds.
> 2. $x_n \stackrel{n \rightarrow \infty}{\rightarrow} a$ : nbhd of $a$ can be $\\{ a,b \\}$ or $X$. $\forall n \geq 1$, $b$ belongs to all nbhds.
> 3. $x_n \stackrel{n \rightarrow \infty}{\rightarrow} c$ : nbhd of $c$ can be $\\{ b,c \\}$ or $X$. $\forall n \geq 1$, $b$ belongs to all nbhds.

NB2; Given $(\mathbb{N}, T_{cof})$, where $T_{cof}:= \\{ A \subseteq \mathbb{N} : A = \emptyset \text{ or } \mathbb{N}\setminus A\text{ is finite set}\\}$. Let $x_n = n.$
Then, $\forall m \in \mathbb{N}, x_n \rightarrow m$.

### Proof

Take any $m \in \mathbb{N}$ and its any nbhd $U_m$. Then, by definition of open set, $\| U_m^c \| < \infty$.
Thus, there exists $k \in \mathbb{N}$ s.t. $\forall a \in U_m^c, a \leq k$. This implies that $\\{ m, k+1, k+2, k+3, \ldots \\} \subseteq U_m$.
Thus, $\forall n \geq k+1, x_n \in U_m$.


Thus, we should put an additional axiom in order to distinguish $x,y \in X$ s.t. $x\ne y$.
More specifically, we want if $x\ne y$, $\exists$ nbhd $V_x, V_y$ s.t. $V_x \cap V_y = \emptyset$, which is called **separation axiom**.

`Def.`{:.info} 
Given T.S. $(X, T_X)$, $X$ is a **Hausdorff space** if $\forall x,y \in X$ s.t. $x\ne y$, $\exists$ disjoint nbhd $U_x, U_y$, i.e., $U_x \cap U_y = \emptyset$.
{:.info}

`Def.`{:.info} 
Given T.S. $(X, T_X)$, $X$ is a **T1 space** if every finite set in $X$ is closed.
{:.info}

NB3; Hausdorff space is T1 space but not conversely.

## Properties

$$ \text{Every finite set in a Hausdorff space is closed.}\nonumber $$

### Proof

It is equivalent to show every singleton set is closed, i.e., for $x_0 \in X$, show $ \overline{\\{x_0\\}}= \\{ x_0 \\}$. 
Since $\overline{\\{x_0\\}} \supseteq \\{ x_0 \\}$ is trivial by definition, it remains to show $\overline{\\{x_0\\}} \subseteq \\{ x_0 \\}$. \\
Let $x \in \overline{\\{x_0\\}}$. If $x= x_0$ then, it holds.
Let $x \ne x_0$. Since $X$ is Hausdorff space, $\exists$ nbhd $U_x$ and $U_{x_0}$ s.t. $U_x \cap U_{x_0} = \emptyset$.
Since $\\{ x_0 \\} \subseteq U_{x_0}$, $U_x \cap \\{x_0\\} = \emptyset \Leftrightarrow U_x \cap (\\{x_0\\} - (\\{x\\})$, i.e., $x$ is not a limit point of $\\{x_0 \\}$.
Thus, if $x \in \overline{\\{x_0\\}}$ and $x \ne x_0$, then $x \not\in \overline{\\{x_0\\}}$.
Hence, $\overline{\\{x_0\\}} = \\{ x_0 \\}$, i.e., every singleton set is closed.

---

$$ \text{Given T1 space } X \text{ and } A \subseteq X, x \in A' \text{(lim. pt.) iff } \forall \text{nbhd } V \text{ of } x, | V \cap A | = \infty. \nonumber $$

NB4; This means every nbhd contains infinitely many points in $A$.


### Proof

1. $(\Leftarrow)$ $\forall$ nbhd $V$ of $x$, $V \cap (A - \\{ x\\} ) \ne \emptyset$, which is the definition of limit point, i.e., $x \in A'$.
2. $(\Rightarrow)$ Suppose $\exists$ nbhd $V$ of $x$ s.t. $\| V \cap A \| < \infty$. Set $A \cap (A - \\{ x\\} ) = \\{x_1, \ldots, x_m \\}$.
Since $X$ is a T1 space, $ \\{x_1, \ldots, x_m \\}$ is closed. Then, $x \not\in  \\{x_1, \ldots, x_m \\} \Leftrightarrow x \in  \\{x_1, \ldots, x_m \\}^c =U$, where $U$ is open.
Then, $V \cap U$ is a nbhd of $x$. Since $x \in A'$ by Asm, $(V \cap U) \cap (A - \\{ x \\}) \ne \emptyset$. $\Leftrightarrow [ V \cap (U - \\{ x \\}) ]\cap A \ne \emptyset $ $
\Leftrightarrow A \cap [V \cap \\{ x \\}^c ] \cap \\{x_1, \ldots, x_m \\}^c \ne \emptyset$. However, LHS is $\emptyset$, i.e., contradiction.
Thus, $\forall \text{nbhd } V \text{ of } x, | V \cap A | = \infty$.

--- 

$$ \text{Givne Hausdorff sp. } (X, T_X). \text{ Let } \{ x_n \} \text{ be a seq. in } X \text{ satisfying } x_n \rightarrow a \text{ and } x_n \rightarrow b. \text{ Then, } a= b. \nonumber $$

NB5; This means the uniqueness of a limit point in Hausdorff space.

### Proof

If $a \ne b$, there exists nbhd $U_a$ and $U_b$ s.t. $U_a \cap U_b = \emptyset$. Since $x_n \rightarrow a$, $\exists N_1 \in \mathbb{N}$ s.t. $\forall n \geq N_1$, $x_n \in U_a$.
Thus, $U_b$ contains at most $x_1, \cdots, x_{N_1-1}$. On the other hand, $b$ is a limit point of $\\{x_n\\}$. However, $U_b$ contains only finitely many $x_i$'s, which is a contradiction.


# Continuity

`Def.`{:.info} 
Given T.S. $(X, T_X)$ and $(Y, T_Y)$, we say $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is **continuous** if $\forall V \in T_Y$, $f^{-1}(V) \in T_X$.
{:.info}

## Properties

$$ \text{Given T.S. } (X, T_X) \text{ and } (Y, T_Y), \text{ TFAE.} \nonumber $$

> 1. $f: X \rightarrow Y$ is cts, i.e., $\forall V \in T_Y$, $f^{-1}(V) \in T_X$.
> 2. $\forall p \in X$, $\forall$ nbhd $V$ of $f(p)$, $\exists U$ of $p$ s.t. $f(U) \subseteq V$.
> 3. $\forall A \subseteq X$, $f(\bar{A}) \subseteq \overline{f(A)}$.
> 4. $\forall$ closed $F \subseteq Y$, $f^{-1}(F)$ is closed in $X$.

### Proof

1. ($1 \Leftrightarrow 4$) Note that $\forall B \subseteq Y, f^{-1}(B^c)= X - f^{-1}(B)$.
> a. $(\Rightarrow)$ Take any closed $F$ in $Y$. Then, $f^{-1}(F^c) = X - f^{-1}(F)$. Since $f$ is cts, $f^{-1}(F^c)$ is open, i.e., $f^{-1}(F)$ is closed in $X$. \\
> b. $(\Leftarrow)$ For any closed $F$ in $Y$, $(f^{-1}(F))^c \in T_X$. Then, $F^c \in T_Y$, $f^{-1}(F^c) = X - f^{-1}(F)= X \cap (f^{-1}(F))^c \in T_X$. Thus, $f$ is cts.

2. ($1 \Leftrightarrow 2$) $\forall p \in X$, let $V$ be a nbhd of $f(p)$. Then, $f(p) \in V \Leftrightarrow p \in f^{-1}(V)$.
> a. $(\Rightarrow)$ Let $U=f^{-1}(V)$. Then, $f(U) = f(f^{-1}(V)) \subseteq V$ by [a general fact](/rm/rm1#proposition).\\
> b. $(\Leftarrow)$ Take any open $V\in T_Y$. By Asm (2), $\forall p \in f^{-1}(V), \exists$ nbhd $U_p$ of $p$ s.t. $f(U_p) \subseteq V$, i.e., $U_p \subseteq f^{-1}(V)$.
Then, $f^{-1}(V) = \cup_{p \in f^{-1}(V)}U_p$. This means that $f^{-1}(V)$ is a union of open sets, i.e., open in $X$.

3. ($2 \Rightarrow 3$) Take any $A \subseteq X$. Let $p \in \bar{A}$, then $f(p) \in f(\bar{A})$ holds. Take any nbhd $V$ of $f(p)$. By Asm (2), 
$\exists$ nbhd $U$ of $p$ s.t. $f(U) \subseteq V$. Since $p \in \bar{A}, U\cap A \ne \emptyset \leadsto \exists x \in U\cap A$.
$\leadsto f(x) \in f(U) \subseteq V$ and $f(x) \in f(A)$. Thus, $f(x) \in V \cap f(A) \ne \emptyset$, i.e., $f(p) \in \overline{f(A)}$.

4. ($3 \Rightarrow 4$) Take any closed $F$ in $Y$. Thus, we need to show $\overline{f^{-1}(F)} = f^{-1}(F)$, where $\supseteq$ is clear. \\
Let $p \in \overline{f^{-1}(F)}$. By Asm (3), let $A = f^{-1}(F) \subseteq X$. Then, $f(\bar{A}) \subseteq \overline{f(A)}$, i.e., $f(\overline{f^{-1}(F)}) \subseteq \overline{f(f^{-1}(F))}$.
$\leadsto f(p) \in f(\overline{f^{-1}(F)}) \subseteq \overline{f(f^{-1}(F))} \subseteq \bar{F} =F$. Thus, $f(p) \in F$, i.e., $p \in f^{-1}(F)$.