---
title: "Random math: 37"
tag: [RM, Topology]
---
Source of most content: [Gunhee Cho](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCB_AbuIVIG8I3K3_T_j0FSw/), [Lecture note by Matsumura](http://pi.math.cornell.edu/%7Ematsumura/math4530/math4530web.html) and Topology by Munkres.

# Path-connected

`Def.`{:.info} 
Given T.S. $(X, T)$, $X$ is **path-connected** if $\forall p, q \in X$, $\exists$ cts map $f:[a, b] (\subseteq \mathbb{R}) \to X$ s.t. $f(a)=p$ and $f(q)=b$. We call $f$ a **path**.
{:.info}
NB1; If $X$ is path-connected, then $X$ is connected. 
> Suppose $X$ is disconnected, i.e., $X = U \mathbin{\unicode{x228D}} V$ for non-empty open sets $U, V$. Since $f$ is continuous and $[a, b]$ is connected ([NB6](/rm/rm36#linear-continum)), $f([a, b])=X$ is also connected ([2](/rm/rm36#proof-2)) which is a contradiction. 

NB2; Every ball is path-connected.
> Let $B_{\epsilon}(0) \subsetneq \mathbb{R}^n$ be a $\epsilon$-ball centered zero. Then, $\forall x,y \in B_{\epsilon}(0) = B$, $\forall t \in [0, 1]$, let $f(t) := tx + (1-t)y$. Since $\Vert x \Vert, \Vert y \Vert \leq \epsilon$, $\Vert f(t) \Vert \leq \epsilon$, i.e., $f(t) \in B$.

NB3; The closure of a connected space is connected, but the closure of a path connected space may not be path connected. \\
NB4; $S^{n-1}  = \\{ (x_1, \ldots, x_n) | x_1^2 + \ldots + x_n^2 = 1, x_i \in \mathbb{R} \\} \subsetneq \mathbb{R}^n$. Consider $f : \mathbb{R}^n \setminus \\{0\\} \to S^{n-1} (x \mapsto \frac{x}{\Vert x \Vert}). $ \\
NB5; Example taht is connected but not path-connected. ([Topologist's sine curve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Topologist%27s_sine_curve))
> Consider $I= [0, 1]$ which is connected. Then, $I \times I$ is also connected. If $I \times I$ is path-connected, we can tak $(0,0)$ and $(1,1)$. 
Then, $\exists$ cts $f: [a, b] \to I \times I$ with $f(a) = (0,0)$ and $f(b)=(1,1)$.
By [IVT](/rm/rm36#intermediate-value-thm), $\forall x \in I$, $f^{-1}(x \times (0,1)) \ne \emptyset$.
Note that $\forall x \ne y$ in $I$, $f^{-1}(x\times (0,1)) \cap f^{-1}(y \times (0,1))=\emptyset$.
Since $f^{-1}(x\times (0,1))$ is open in $[a, b]$, it contains some interval in $f^{-1}(x\times (0,1))$.
Then, by the density of $\mathbb{Q}$, choose $q_x$ in that interval.
In this way, we can define $\Phi : I \to \mathbb{Q} (x \mapsto q_x)$. Then, $\Phi$ is injective by construction.
This implies that $|I| \leq |Q|$, which is a contradiction since $I$ is uncountable. 

# Locally connected

`Def.`{:.info} 
Given T.S. $(X, T)$, $X$ is **locally connected** if $\forall x \in X,$ $\forall$ nbhd $U_x$ of $x$, $\exists$ connected nbhd $V_x$ of $x$ s.t. $x \in V_x \subseteq U_x$.  
{:.info}

`Def.`{:.info} 
Given T.S. $(X, T)$, $X$ is **locally path-connected** if $\forall x \in X,$ $\forall$ nbhd $U_x$ of $x$, $\exists$ path-connected nbhd $V_x$ of $x$ s.t. $x \in V_x \subseteq U_x$.  
{:.info}

NB6; $\mathbb{R}-\\{0\\}$ is not connected but locaaly connected. \\
NB7; $\mathbb{Q}$ is not connected and not locally connected.