---
title: "Random math: 26"
tag: [RM, Topology]
---
Source of most content: [Gunhee Cho](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCB_AbuIVIG8I3K3_T_j0FSw/) and [Lecture notes by Parimal Parag](https://ece.iisc.ac.in/~parimal/2015/proofs.html).

# Cover and Compact

`Def.`{:.info} 
Given a T.S. $(X, T_X)$, $\\{ A_\alpha \\}_{\alpha \in J} \subset 2^X$ is a **cover** of $X$ if $X \subset \bigcup _{\alpha \in J} A _\alpha$. \\
If $\\{ A _\alpha \\} _{\alpha \in J} \subset T_X$, then it is called **open cover** of $X$.
{:.info}

`Def.`{:.info} 
A T.S. $(X, T_X)$ is **compact** if for any open cover of $X$, $\\{ U _\alpha \\} _{\alpha \in J}$, $\exists \alpha _1, \ldots, \alpha _n$ (finite) s.t. $X \subset \bigcup _{k=1}^n U _{\alpha _k}$, i.e., there exists a finite open subcover of $X$ for any open cover of $X$.
{:.info}

NB1; For finite set $X$, $(X,T)$ is compact. \\
NB2; $((0, 1), T_{subspace})$ is not compact. $\forall n \in \mathbb{N}$, define $U_n = (\frac{1}{n}, 1)$. Then, $(0,1) 
= \cup_{n \in \mathbb{N}}(\frac{1}{n}, 1)$, i.e., $\\{ U _n \\} _{n \in \mathbb{N}}$ is an open cover of $(0,1)$. However, there is no finite subcover s.t. $X \subset \cup _{k=1}^m U _{\alpha_k}$.  \\
NB3; $(\mathbb{R}, T _{std})$ is not compact. Consider $U_n = (n, n+2)$. 

## Properties

1. Closed subspace of compact space is compact.
2. Compact subspace of a Hausdorff space is closed.
3. Let $f: X \rightarrow Y$ be cts function. If $X$ is compact, then $f(X)$ is compact.

### Proof

1. Let $(Y, T_Y)$ be a closed subspace of $(X, T_X)$. Since $Y$ is closed, $X-Y \in T_X$.
Let $U$ be an open cover of $Y$, which consists of an open sets in $(X, T_X)$. Then, $U \cup \\{ X-Y \\}$ is an open cover of $X$.
Since $(X, T_X)$ is a compact set, there is a finite subcover of $ U \cup \\{ X-Y \\}$, $V = \\{ U_1, \ldots, U_m \\}$, which covers $X$.
If $X-Y \in V$, $V \setminus \\{ X-Y \\}$ is a finite subcover of $Y$. If not, $V$ is a finite subcover of $Y$. Thus, $(Y, T_Y)$ is compact.
2. Let $X$ be a Hausdorff space and compact subspace $C \subseteq X$. Take $x \in X - C$, then for each $y \in C$, $\exists$ nbhd $U_x, V_y$ s.t. $U_x \cap V_y \stackrel{Hausdorff}{=} \emptyset$. Then, $\\{ V_y: y \in C\\}$ is an open cover of $C$.
Since $C$ is compact, $\exists y_1, \ldots, y_n$ s.t. $C \subset V = \cup_{k=1}^n V_{y_k}$.
Take intersection of disjoint nbhd of $x$, i.e., $U = \cap_{k=1}^n U_{x}$. Then, $U \cap V = \emptyset$.
Thus, $X \setminus C = \cup_{x\in X \setminus C} U_x$ is open, i.e., $C$ is closed.
3. Let $\mathcal{V}$ be an open cover of $f(X)$. Since $f$ is cts, $\forall V \in \mathcal{V}, f^{-1}(V)$ is open in $X$.
Then, $\\{ f^{-1}(V) : V \in \mathcal{V} \\}$ is an open cover of $X$. As $X$ is compact, it has a finite subcover $X \subset \cup_{i=1}^n f^{-1}(V_i)$. Thus, $\\{V_1, \ldots, V_n \\}$ is a finite subcover of $f(X)$.

---

$$ \text{Let } f: X \rightarrow Y \text{ be cts, bijectve fn. Let } X \text{ be compact and } Y \text{ be Hausdorff. Then, } f \text{ is a homeomorphism.} \nonumber$$

### Proof

It suffices to show $f^{-1}$ is cts fn. Take any closed $F$ in $X$. Then, by above [1](/rm/rm26#properties), $F$ is compact. By [3](/rm/rm26#properties), $f(F)$ is compact. Then, by [2](/rm/rm26#properties), $f(F)$ is closed. 